Editorial review: Document CSS carousel functionality (#38752)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/css_overflow/css_carousels/index.md

---
title: Creating CSS carousels
slug: Web/CSS/CSS_overflow/CSS_carousels
page-type: guide
---

{{CSSRef}}

The [CSS overflow](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_overflow) module defines features enabling the creation of flexible and accessible pure-CSS carousels with browser-generated and developer-styled scroll buttons and scroll markers. This guide explains how to use these features.

## Carousel concepts

**Carousels** are a common feature on the web. They typically take the form of a scrolling content area containing several items, such as presentation slides, ads, headline news stories, or key product features.

> Users can move through the items by clicking or activating navigational buttons or by swiping. The navigation usually includes **scroll buttons**, generally "previous" and "next" buttons or links, and **scroll markers**, which are a series of button or link icons each representing an item within the carousel.

Author: The image is definitely showing in my local version; I tend not to use SVG diagrams because I always have problems with them being massive compared to the PNG versions, or the crushing operation not working correctly.

svgomg.com redirects to a dodgy shopping site, BTW. Did you mean https://jakearchibald.github.io/svgomg/ ?

When I upload my SVG to Jake's site, it does reduce it down to a bit smaller than the equivalent PNG, but it inverts the colors of the diagram, which I don't want.

> Users can move through the items by clicking or activating navigational buttons or by swiping. The navigation usually includes **scroll buttons**, generally "previous" and "next" buttons or links, and **scroll markers**, which are a series of button or link icons each representing an item within the carousel.

Reviewer: > either way, the image below is not showing in preview. I assume it is a dev server issue, but please double check.

Yes, this is a known issue: https://github.com/mdn/rari/issues/101.

![A carousel with a content area in the middle, previous and next buttons to the left and right, and scroll markers at the bottom](carousel.png)

> A key feature of carousels is **pagination** — the items feel like separate pieces of content that are moved between rather than forming one continuous section of content. You might show one item at a time, or several items on each "page". When several items are shown, you might choose to show an entire new page of items each time the "next" button is pressed, or add a single new item on the end of the list and move the first one out of view.

Author: Some good updates here, but I felt that the last sentence became a bit wordy and hard to parse. I tried coming up with a more streamlined version, and ended up with this:

> A key feature of carousels is **pagination** — the items feel like separate pieces of content that are moved between rather than forming one continuous section of content. You might show one item at a time or several items on each carousel "page". When several items are visible, you might show an entirely new group of items each time the "next" or "previous" button is pressed. Alternatively, you could add a single new item to one end of the list and move the item at the other end out of view.

- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}}
  - : Generated inside a scroll container; used to collect together and lay out scroll markers.
- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}}
  - : Generated inside the children of a scroll container ancestor to represent their scroll markers. These can be selected to scroll the container to their associated child elements, and are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.
- {{cssxref(":target-current")}}
  - : This pseudo-class can be used to select the currently-active scroll marker. It can be used to provide a highlight style to the currently active marker, which is important for usability and accessibility.
- {{cssxref("::column")}}
  - : This pseudo-element represents the individual columns generated when a container is set to display its content in multiple columns via [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout). It can be used in conjunction with {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} to generate a scroll marker for each column.

## Carousel with single pages

> In our first demo, each content item takes up a full page of the carousel, and you can scroll between items using the scroll buttons, etc. [Flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) is used in this case to force each item to take up the full width of the carousel.

Author: Right, I've updated these to:

> In our first demo, we will create a carousel of single pages, with each item taking up the full page. We'll have [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) as bottom navigation and [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) on the sides of the page, enabling the user to move to the next and previous pages.
>
> [Flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) is used for the general layout of the carousel, [CSS scroll snap](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) is used to enforce clear pagination, and [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning) is used to position the scroll markers and scroll buttons relative to the carousel.

I don't think we need to show the live example up here.

> In our first demo, each content item takes up a full page of the carousel, and you can scroll between items using the scroll buttons, etc. [Flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) is used in this case to force each item to take up the full width of the carousel.

Author: I've also added a similar introductory paragraph for the second demo.

> The HTML for the first demo consists of a [heading element](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/Heading_Elements) and an [unordered list](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ul), with each [list item](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/li) containing some sample content:

Author: Yeah, not a bad idea. I have done this for the first and second demos. I'm keeping the first-example and second-example labels for the live demos, however.

```html live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
<h1>CSS carousel single item per page</h1>
<ul>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 1</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 2</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 3</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 4</h2>
  </li>
</ul>
```

### Carousel layout with flexbox

> The unordered list is made to fill the full width of the viewport with a width {{cssxref("width")}} of `100vw`; it is also given a {{cssxref("height")}} of `300px`, and some {{cssxref("padding")}}. We then use flexbox to lay out the list — setting a {{cssxref("display")}} value of `flex` to force the child list items to display horizontally, with a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `4vw` between each one.

Author: I've used this mostly as shown.

```css hidden live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

h1 {
  text-align: center;
  font-size: 1.7rem;
}

button {

>   background-color: white;

Author: Oooops, we no longer have the button elements in the HTML, so this is no longer needed ;-)

Removed, from all pages.

}
```

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 20px;
  display: flex;
  gap: 4vw;
}
```

> Now its time to style the list items — they are given some rudimentary styling, followed by a {{cssxref("flex")}} value of `0 0 100%` to force each one to be as wide as their container (the `<ul>`). This causes the list items to be horizontally centered inside their container when visible.

Author: Bloody pendant ;-)

I was more referring to the visual output rather than technical correctness, but I think your edit serves both well. Updated.

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
li {
  list-style-type: none;
  background-color: #eee;
  border: 1px solid #ddd;
  padding: 20px;

  flex: 0 0 100%;
}

li:nth-child(even) {
  background-color: cyan;
}
```

> In addition, every even-numbered list item is given a different background-color via {{cssxref(":nth-child()")}}, so that it is easier to see the scrolling effect.

Author: I don't see the point of this. We are not here to teach overflow and scroll snap.

### Setting up scroll snapping on the list

> As the viewport is wider than our horizontal row of flex-items, the `<ul>` will be a {{glossary("scroll container")}}. An {{cssxref("overflow-x")}} value of `scroll` is set on the list so that its content will scroll horizontally. [CSS scroll snap](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) is then used to snap to each item or "page": a {{cssxref("scroll-snap-type")}} value of `x mandatory` is set to make the list into a [scroll snap container](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Scroll_snap#scroll_snap_container). The `x` keyword causes the container's [snap targets](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Scroll_snap#snap_target) to be snapped to horizontally, whereas the `mandatory` keyword means that the container will always snap to a snap target at the end of a scrolling action.

Author: ok, done, and I've cleared up the confusion about the scroll container.

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
ul {
  overflow-x: scroll;
  scroll-snap-type: x mandatory;
}
```

Next, a {{cssxref("scroll-snap-align")}} value of `center` is set on the list items so that, when the list is scrolled, it snaps to the center of each list item.

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
li {
  scroll-snap-align: center;
}
```

> The code shown so far creates a horizontally-scrolling list, where each list item stretches the entire width of the list. CSS scroll snap has been used to cause the list to snap to each list item when scrolling.

Author: Good point. This is repetitive along with the above description. I've reduced it down to

> The code shown so far renders as follows:

{{EmbedLiveSample("first-example-step1", "100%", "400px")}}

> Try scrolling the list by swiping or using the scrollbar to see the scroll snapping effect.

Author: Nice suggestion; added.

> [!NOTE]
> CSS scroll snapping is not mandatory to use the CSS carousel features. However, they work a lot better with scroll snapping included. Without scroll snapping, the scroll buttons and markers will be unlikely to navigate cleanly between pages, and the result will be substandard.

### Creating scroll buttons

> In this section we will add "previous" and "next" scroll buttons to the demo to provide another tool to navigate between carousel pages. This can be achieved easily using the {{cssxref("::scroll-button()")}} pseudo-element.

Author: Good call; updated.

> The `::scroll-button()` pseudo-elements are generated inside a scroll container only when their {{cssxref("content")}} properties are set to a value other than `none`. Each `::scroll-button()` represents a scroll button, the scrolling direction of which is specified by the selector's argument. You can generate up to four scroll buttons per scroll container, which will scroll the content towards the start and end of the block and inline axes.

Author: I've edited this a bit, but I am concerned that your suggestion makes the last sentence wordy and hard to parse. Since we already said earlier on that the pseudo-element argument specifies the scrolling direction of a button, I think we can leave it as just this:

> The `::scroll-button()` pseudo-elements generate buttons inside a scroll container only when their {{cssxref("content")}} properties are set to a value other than `none`. Each `::scroll-button()` represents a scroll button, the scrolling direction of which is specified by the selector's argument. You can generate up to four scroll buttons per scroll container, which will scroll the container's content towards the start or end of the block or inline axis.

You can also specify a value of `*` to target all of the `::scroll-button()` pseudo-elements with styles.

> First, all scroll buttons are targeted with some rudimentary styles for different states. Note that scroll buttons are automatically set to [`disabled`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/disabled) when no more scrolling can occur in that direction.

Author: updated

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step2
ul::scroll-button(*) {
  border: 0;
  font-size: 2rem;
  background: none;
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.7);

>   cursor: pointer;

Reviewer 2: add a link and why for the pointer in the discussion.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean by this.

}

ul::scroll-button(*):hover,
ul::scroll-button(*):focus {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 1);
}

ul::scroll-button(*):active {
  translate: 1px 1px;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):disabled {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.2);
}
```

Next, an appropriate icon is set on the left and right scroll buttons via the `content` property, which is also what causes the scroll buttons to be generated:

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step2
ul::scroll-button(left) {
  content: "◄";
}

ul::scroll-button(right) {

>   content: "►";

Author: Alt text is not needed; that is handled automatically. But we should mention that. I've added the following note underneath this code block:

> [!NOTE]
> The scroll buttons are automatically given an appropriate accessible name, so they are announced appropriately by assistive technologies. For example, the above buttons are announced in VoiceOver as "scroll left, button" and "scroll right, button".

I've added the following to the appropriate places on the `content` property and CSS generated content module pages:

- {{cssxref("::scroll-button()")}}
- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}}
- {{cssxref(":target-current")}}

I didn't think the others were particularly relevant — it is not invalid to set `content` on them, but you can't see it, and it serves no purpose.

}
```

### Positioning scroll buttons

> The scroll buttons can be positioned relative to the carousel using [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning). First of all, a reference {{cssxref("anchor-name")}} is set on the list. Next, each scroll button has its {{cssxref("position")}} set to `absolute`, and its {{cssxref("position-anchor")}} property set to the same reference name defined on the list, to associate the two together.

Author: updated

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step2
ul {
  anchor-name: --myCarousel;
}

ul::scroll-button(*) {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
}
```

> To actually position each scroll button, we set values on their {{glossary("inset properties")}} that use {{cssxref("anchor()")}} functions to position the specified sides of the buttons relative to the sides of the carousel. In each case, the {{cssxref("calc()")}} function is used to add some space between the button edge and the carousel edge. So for example, the right-hand edge of the left scroll button is positioned 70 pixels to the right of the carousel's left-hand edge.

Author: updated

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step2
ul::scroll-button(left) {
  right: calc(anchor(left) - 70px);
  bottom: calc(anchor(top) + 13px);
}

ul::scroll-button(right) {
  left: calc(anchor(right) - 70px);
  bottom: calc(anchor(top) + 13px);
}
```

Adding in the scroll button code, we get the following result:

{{EmbedLiveSample("first-example-step2", "100%", "400px")}}

Try pressing the "previous" and "next" scroll buttons to see how the pages are scrolled, respecting the scroll-snapping behavior. Also note how the "previous" button is automatically disabled when the list is scrolled to the start of the content, while the "next" button is automatically disabled when the list is scrolled to the end of the content.

### Creating scroll markers

In this section, scroll markers will be added to to the carousel to provide another navigation tool that also indicates your progress through the carousel pages. Creating the scroll markers involves three main features:

> - The {{cssxref("scroll-marker-group")}} property needs to be set to a non-`none` value for the {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element to be generated; its value specifies where the scroll marker group appears in the carousel's tab order and layout box order (but not DOM structure) — `before` puts it at the start, while `after` puts it at the end.

Author: updated

- The {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element exists inside a scroll container, and is used to collect together and lay out scroll markers.
- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} pseudo-elements exist inside children of a scroll container ancestor, and represent their scroll markers. These are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.

To begin with, the list's `scroll-marker-group` property is set to `after`, so the `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is placed after the list's DOM content in the focus order:

```css live-sample___first-example
ul {
  scroll-marker-group: after;
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The `scroll-marker-group` property value also affects where the scroll marker group appears in the carousel's tab order — `before` puts it at the start, while `after` puts it at the end.

Author: I've deleted this note; it repeats what I said earlier in the `scroll-marker-group` property bullet point.

```css live-sample___first-example
li::scroll-marker {
  width: 16px;
  height: 16px;
  background-color: transparent;
  border: 2px solid black;
  border-radius: 50%;
  content: "";
}
```

Finally for this section, the {{cssxref(":target-current")}} pseudo-class is used to select whichever scroll marker corresponds to the currently visible "page", highlighting how far the user has scrolled through the content. In this case, we set the `background-color` to `black` so it is styled as a filled-in circle.

```css live-sample___first-example
li::scroll-marker:target-current {
  background-color: black;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Accessibility-wise, the scroll marker group and contained scroll markers are rendered with [`tablist`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/tablist_role)/[`tab`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/tab_role) semantics. When you <kbd>Tab</kbd> to the group, it behaves like a single item (that is, another press of the <kbd>Tab</kbd> key will move past the group to the next item), and you can move between the different scroll markers using the left and right (or up and down) cursor keys.

> ## First example final result

Author: I ended up changing this to "## Single page carousel final result", as we said we were getting rid of the "first example" description.

All of the above code combines together to create the following final result:

{{EmbedLiveSample("first-example", "100%", "400px")}}

Since the previous live example, the scroll markers have been added — try pressing them to jump straight to each page. Note how the current marker is highlighted so you can see where you are in the pagination. Also try tabbing to the scroll marker group, then use the cursor keys to cycle through each page.

You can also navigate between pages by swiping left and right, using the scroll bar, or pressing the scroll buttons.

## Responsive carousel: multiple items per page

> The second demo uses the {{cssxref("columns")}} property and the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-element to create arbitary columns that span the full width of the carousel and contain multiple items that can vary in number depending on the viewport width. In this case, the scroll markers are created per-column rather than per-item.

Author: I already added my own description, which serves this purpose:

> The second demo creates a carousel with multiple items per page, which again includes [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) and [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) for navigating through the pages. The demo is also responsive — different numbers of items appear on each page depending on the viewport width.
>
> This demo is very similar to the [Carousel with single pages](#carousel_with_single_pages) demo, except that instead of using flexbox for layout, it uses [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout) and the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-element to create arbitary columns that span the full width of the carousel and contain multiple items. In this case, the scroll markers are created per-column rather than per-item.
>
> The HTML is very similar to that of the previous demo, except that there are significantly more list items, and we are labelling them as items, not pages:

> The HTML for the second demo is very similar to that of the first demo, except that there are significantly more list items, and we are labelling them as items, not pages:

Author: updated

```html-nolint
...
  <li>
    <h2>Item 1</h2>
  </li>
...
```

> The second example also has very similar CSS, with the exception of the rules explained in the following sections.

Author: done

```html hidden live-sample___second-example
<h1>CSS carousel multiple items per page</h1>
<ul>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 1</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 2</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 3</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 4</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 5</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 6</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 7</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 8</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 9</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 10</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 11</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 12</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 13</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 14</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 15</h2>
  </li>
</ul>
```

### Carousel layout using columns

> The list's layout doesn't use flexbox, instead using a {{cssxref("columns")}} value of `1` to force its contents to display as a single column. A {{cssxref("text-align")}} value of `center` is also applied, to force the contents to align with the center of the list.

Reviewer 2: We need to explain the "why" of the the single column

```css hidden live-sample___second-example
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

h1 {
  text-align: center;
  font-size: 1.7rem;
}

button {
  background-color: white;
}
```

```css live-sample___second-example
ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 10px;

  overflow-x: scroll;
  scroll-snap-type: x mandatory;

  columns: 1;
  text-align: center;
}
```

> The list item layout rule is similar to the one for the first demo — it uses the same rudimentary box styling for the list items. However, each list item no longer stretches the full width of the list — multiple items now fit into the single content column (as defined using the `columns` property above), and the number will dynamically change as the list gets wider or narrower.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We provide rudimentary box styling for the list items, with multiple items fitting into the single content column (as previously defined using the `columns` property), and the number will dynamically change as the list gets wider or narrower.
```
not supposed to use "beyond" and "below" anymore ;)

Author: Whatevs. Updated.

Reviewer 2: the PR is in draft: https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/38846

```css live-sample___second-example
li {
  list-style-type: none;

  display: inline-block;
  height: 100%;
  aspect-ratio: 3/4;

  background-color: #eee;
  border: 1px solid #ddd;
  padding: 20px;
  margin: 0 10px;

  text-align: left;
}

li:nth-child(even) {
  background-color: cyan;
}
```

> The differences are as follows:

Reviewer 2: Say what we are doing, not what we are doing differently

Author: OK, I've changed it to "The key properties are as follows:"

- A {{cssxref("display")}} value of `inline-block` has been set to force the list items to sit alongside one another and make the list scroll horizontally.
- A fixed {{cssxref("aspect-ratio")}} of `3/4` has been set on them, to control their sizing as the list size changes, but keep their width constant while the height of the list stays constant.
- A `text-align` value of `left` is set on them to override the `text-align: center` set on the parent container, so the item content will be left-aligned.

> Finally for the layout changes, the {{cssxref("scroll-snap-align")}} property is now set on the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-elements — which represent the content columns generated by the `columns` property — rather than the list items. This makes sense, as in this case we want to snap to each complete column rather than every individual list item.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {{cssxref("scroll-snap-align")}} property is set on the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-elements — which represent the content columns generated by the `columns` property — rather than the list items. As each column will contain one or more list items, dependingn on the width of the viewport, we want to snap to each complete column rather than every individual list item, showing all new items with each scroll action.
```

Reviewer 2: add a sentence about the hidden css and link to the explanation above

Author: I mostly used your suggestion above, but the last sentence was really wordy, so I just used "We want to snap to each complete column rather than every individual list item, showing all new items with each scroll action." I didn't think the first bit was needed, as we already said it earlier.

I already linked to the section about scroll buttons above, so I don't think I need a link to the scroll buttons section again?

```css live-sample___second-example
ul::column {
  scroll-snap-align: center;
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___second-example
ul::scroll-button(*) {
  border: 0;
  font-size: 2rem;
  background: none;
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.7);
  cursor: pointer;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):hover,
ul::scroll-button(*):focus {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 1);
}

ul::scroll-button(*):active {
  translate: 1px 1px;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):disabled {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.2);
}

ul::scroll-button(left) {

>   content: "◄";

Reviewer 2: alt

Author: Nope; see earlier comment.

}

ul::scroll-button(right) {
  content: "►";
}

ul {
  anchor-name: --myCarousel;
}

ul::scroll-button(*) {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
}

ul::scroll-button(left) {
  right: calc(anchor(left) - 70px);
  bottom: calc(anchor(top) + 13px);
}

ul::scroll-button(right) {
  left: calc(anchor(right) - 70px);
  bottom: calc(anchor(top) + 13px);
}

ul {
  scroll-marker-group: after;
}

ul::scroll-marker-group {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
  top: calc(anchor(bottom) - 70px);
  justify-self: anchor-center;
  display: flex;
  justify-content: center;
  gap: 20px;
}
```

### Column scroll markers

> The CSS for creating the scroll markers in the second example is nearly identical to the first example, except that the selectors are different — the scroll markers are created on the generated `::column` scroll markers rather than the list items.

Reviewer 2: "is similar to the flexbox full page example....

note that we are generating content on a pseudo-element to confirm that this is a normal thing to do

Reviewer 2: yes on generating on before and after, but this is generating something on another thing that is generated. The https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::after shows a pseudo class example, but not adding to a pseudo-element.  a ::before on a ::first-letter  (`p::first-letter::after`) is not common. Content is only supported on tree-abiding pseudo-elements, not all pseudo elements, which is why i think we should point it out as many don't realize you can attach a pseudo to a pseudo.

Author: ok, I've added a bit to cover this.

```css live-sample___second-example
ul::column::scroll-marker {
  content: "";
  width: 16px;
  height: 16px;
  background-color: transparent;
  border: 2px solid black;
  border-radius: 10px;
}

ul::column::scroll-marker:target-current {
  background-color: black;
}
```

## Second example final result

> The second example is rendered as follows:

Reviewer 2: ~~second~~

Author: updated

{{EmbedLiveSample("second-example", "100%", "400px")}}

> Again, try navigating between the different pages by swiping left and right or using the scroll bar, pressing the scroll buttons, and pressing the scroll markers. This works much the same as in the first example, except that now there are multiple list items in each navigated position.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try navigating between the different pages by swiping left and right or using the scroll bar, pressing the scroll buttons, and pressing the scroll markers. The functionality is similar to the full-page flexbox example, except that now there are multiple list items in each navigated position, as the marker is on a column potentially containing multiple items, instead of on each item.
```

Author: updated

Also, try resizing the screen width and you'll see that the number of list items that can fit inside the list changes — and therefore the number of generated columns changes too. As the number of columns changes, the number of scroll markers dynamically updates so that each column is represented in the scroll marker group.

## See also

> - [CSS overflow](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_overflow) module

Reviewer 2: add the anchor positioning and scroll snap guides

Author: Added

---
title: Creating CSS carousels
slug: Web/CSS/CSS_overflow/CSS_carousels
page-type: guide
---

{{CSSRef}}

The [CSS overflow](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_overflow) module defines features enabling the creation of flexible and accessible pure-CSS carousels with browser-generated and developer-styled scroll buttons and scroll markers. This guide explains how to use these features.

## Carousel concepts

**Carousels** are a common feature on the web. They typically take the form of a scrolling content area containing several items, such as presentation slides, ads, headline news stories, or key product features.

> Users can move through the items by clicking or activating navigational buttons or by swiping. The navigation usually includes **scroll buttons**, generally "previous" and "next" buttons or links, and **scroll markers**, which are a series of button or link icons each representing one or more items depending on how many items are shown at each scroll position within the carousel.

Author: updated

![A carousel with a content area in the middle, previous and next buttons to the left and right, and scroll markers at the bottom](carousel.png)

> A key feature of carousels is **pagination** — the items feel like separate pieces of content that are moved between rather than forming one continuous section of content. You might show one item at a time or several items on each carousel "page". When several items are visible, you might show an entirely new group of items each time the "next" or "previous" button is pressed. Alternatively, you could add a single new item to one end of the list and move the item at the other end out of view.

Author: updated

> Creating carousels with JavaScript can be quite brittle and challenging to implement. They require scripts to associate scroll markers with the items they represent and continuously update the scroll buttons to keep them operating correctly. When carousels are created using JavaScript, the accessibility of the carousel and the associated controls needs to be added in.

Author: updated, with a couple of tweaks

- {{cssxref(":target-current")}}
  - : This pseudo-class can be used to select the currently-active scroll marker. It can be used to provide a highlight style to the currently active marker, which is important for usability and accessibility.
- {{cssxref("::column")}}
  - : This pseudo-element represents the individual columns generated when a container is set to display its content in multiple columns via [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout). It can be used in conjunction with {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} to generate a scroll marker for each column.

## Carousel with single pages

In our first demo, we will create a carousel of single pages, with each item taking up the full page. We'll have [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) as bottom navigation and [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) on the sides of the page, enabling the user to move to the next and previous pages.

> [Flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) is used for the general layout of the carousel, [CSS scroll snap](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) is used to enforce clear pagination, and [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning) is used to position the scroll markers and scroll buttons relative to the carousel.

Author: fixed

The HTML consists of a [heading element](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/Heading_Elements) and an [unordered list](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ul), with each [list item](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/li) containing some sample content:

```html live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
<h1>CSS carousel single item per page</h1>
<ul>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 1</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 2</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 3</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 4</h2>
  </li>
</ul>
```

### Carousel layout with flexbox

> We use [flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) on the `<ul>` container and `<li>` children to create a single row of items, forcing the child list items to display horizontally with each item taking up the full width of the carousel.

Author: updated

ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 20px;
  display: flex;
  gap: 4vw;
}
```

Now its time to style the list items. The first declarations provide rudimentary styling. The important declaration is the {{cssxref("flex")}} value of `0 0 100%`, which forces each item to be as wide as the container (the `<ul>`). The viewport content will now scroll horizontally.

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
li {
  list-style-type: none;
  background-color: #eee;
  border: 1px solid #ddd;
  padding: 20px;

  flex: 0 0 100%;
}

li:nth-child(even) {
  background-color: cyan;
}
```

In addition, every even-numbered list item is given a different background-color via {{cssxref(":nth-child()")}}, so that it is easier to see the scrolling effect.

### Setting up scroll snapping on the list

In this section, we will set an overflow value on the `<ul>` to turn it into a {{glossary("scroll container")}}, then apply [CSS scroll snapping](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) to cause the list to snap to the center of each list item as the content is scrolled.

> An {{cssxref("overflow-x")}} value of `scroll` is set on the list so that its content will scroll horizontally, rather than the entire viewport scrolling. [CSS scroll snap](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) is then used to snap to each "page" — a {{cssxref("scroll-snap-type")}} value of `x mandatory` is set to make the list into a [scroll snap container](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Scroll_snap#scroll_snap_container). The `x` keyword causes the container's [snap targets](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Scroll_snap#snap_target) to be snapped to horizontally, while the `mandatory` keyword means that the container will always snap to a snap target at the end of a scrolling action.

Author: updated

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
ul {
  overflow-x: scroll;
  scroll-snap-type: x mandatory;
}
```

> Next, a {{cssxref("scroll-snap-align")}} value of `center` is set on the list items so that, when the list is scrolled, it snaps to the center of each list item.

Author: Yes, but that is not really what we are talking about here. If you set `scroll-snap-align` to `start`, for example, the list items are snapped to, but they are slightly off-centered to the left, and you can see a bit of the next page in the frame. What I've written makes sense in terms of the rendered result.

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
li {
  scroll-snap-align: center;
}
```

The code shown so far renders as follows:

{{EmbedLiveSample("first-example-step1", "100%", "400px")}}

Try scrolling the list by swiping or using the scrollbar to see the scroll snapping effect. No matter where you end your scroll motion, an item will always "snap" into place.

> [!NOTE]

> > CSS scroll snapping is not mandatory to use the CSS carousel features. However, they work a lot better with scroll snapping included. Without scroll snapping, the scroll buttons and markers will be unlikely to navigate cleanly between pages, and the result will be substandard.

Author: updated

### Creating scroll markers

Scroll markers are a group of links, each one of which scrolls the carousel to a position related to one of the content pages. They provide an additional navigation tool that also indicates your progress through the carousel pages.

In this section, we will add scroll markers to the carousel, which involves three main features:

- The {{cssxref("scroll-marker-group")}} property is set on the scroll container element. It needs to be set to a non-`none` value for the {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element to be generated; its value specifies where the scroll marker group appears in the carousel's tab order and layout box order (but not DOM structure) — `before` puts it at the start, before the scroll buttons, while `after` puts it at the end.
- The {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element exists inside a scroll container, and is used to collect together and lay out scroll markers.
- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} pseudo-elements exist inside children of a scroll container ancestor, and represent their scroll markers. These are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.

> To begin with, the list's `scroll-marker-group` property is set to `after`, so the `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is placed after the list's DOM content in the focus and layout box order:

Author: added

```css live-sample___first-example
ul {
  scroll-marker-group: after;
}
```

> Next, the list's `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is positioned relative to the carousel using CSS anchor positioning, similar to the scroll buttons except that it is horizontally centered on the carousel using a {{cssxref("justify-self")}} value of `anchor-center`. The group is laid out using flexbox, with a {{cssxref("justify-content")}} value of of `center` and a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `20px` so that its children (the `::scroll-marker` pseudo-elements) are centered inside the `::scroll-marker-group` with a gap between each one.

Author: OK, I've added a note ot cover this:

> [!NOTE]
> Generated content is inline by default; we can apply `width` and `height` to our scroll markers because they are being laid out as flex items.

```css live-sample___first-example
li::scroll-marker:target-current {
  background-color: black;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Accessibility-wise, the scroll marker group and contained scroll markers are rendered with [`tablist`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/tablist_role)/[`tab`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/tab_role) semantics. When you <kbd>Tab</kbd> to the group with the keyboard, it behaves like a single item (that is, another press of the <kbd>Tab</kbd> key will move past the group to the next item), and you can move between the different scroll markers using the left and right (or up and down) cursor keys.

## Single page carousel final result

All of the above code combines together to create the following final result:

{{EmbedLiveSample("first-example", "100%", "400px")}}

Since the previous live example, the scroll markers have been added — try pressing them to jump straight to each page. Note how the current marker is highlighted so you can see where you are in the pagination. Also try tabbing to the scroll marker group, then use the cursor keys to cycle through each page.

> You can also navigate between pages by swiping left and right, using the scroll bar, or pressing the scroll buttons.

Author: I can drag the scroll bar to move the scrolling content between pages. I've changed "using" to "dragging".

## Responsive carousel: multiple items per page

The second demo creates a carousel with multiple items per page, which again includes [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) and [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) for navigating through the pages. The demo is also responsive — different numbers of items appear on each page depending on the viewport width.

> This demo is very similar to the [Carousel with single pages](#carousel_with_single_pages) demo, except that instead of using flexbox for layout, it uses [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout) and the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-element to create arbitary columns that span the full width of the carousel and contain multiple items. In this case, the scroll markers are created per-column rather than per-item.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This demo is very similar to the [Carousel with single pages](#carousel_with_single_pages) demo, except that instead of using flexbox for layout, it uses [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout) and the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-element to create arbitary columns that span the full width of the carousel and contain multiple items. In this way, we can be sure that if the viewport grows or shrinks, while the items size remains constant, we'll never have a partial item displayed of the edge of the scrollport.  In this case, the scroll markers are created per-column rather than per-item.
```

The HTML is very similar to that of the previous demo, except that there are significantly more list items and, as multiple items will be visible at a time, we are labeling them as items rather than pages:

```html-nolint
...
  <li>
    <h2>Item 1</h2>
  </li>
...
```

This demo also has very similar CSS, with the exception of the rules explained in the following sections.

```html hidden live-sample___second-example
<h1>CSS carousel multiple items per page</h1>
<ul>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 1</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 2</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 3</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 4</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 5</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 6</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 7</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 8</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 9</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 10</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 11</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 12</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 13</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 14</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 15</h2>
  </li>
</ul>
```

### Carousel layout using columns

> This example uses [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout), rather than flexbox, to layout the carousel items. The {{cssxref("columns")}} value of `1` forces its contents to display as a single column. A {{cssxref("text-align")}} value of `center` is also applied, forcing the contents to align with the center of the list.

Author: updated

```css hidden live-sample___second-example
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

h1 {
  text-align: center;
  font-size: 1.7rem;
}
```

```css live-sample___second-example
ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 10px;

  overflow-x: scroll;
  scroll-snap-type: x mandatory;

  columns: 1;
  text-align: center;
}
```

> We provide rudimentary box styling for the list items, with multiple items fitting into the single content column (as previously defined using the `columns` property); the number dynamically changes as the list gets wider or narrower.

Author: updated

```css live-sample___second-example
li {
  list-style-type: none;

  display: inline-block;
  height: 100%;
  aspect-ratio: 3/4;

  background-color: #eee;
  border: 1px solid #ddd;
  padding: 20px;
  margin: 0 10px;

  text-align: left;
}

li:nth-child(even) {
  background-color: cyan;
}
```

The key properties are as follows:

- A {{cssxref("display")}} value of `inline-block` has been set to force the list items to sit alongside one another and make the list scroll horizontally.

> - A fixed {{cssxref("aspect-ratio")}} of `3/4` has been set on them, to control their sizing as the list size changes, but keep their width constant while the height of the list stays constant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A fixed {{cssxref("aspect-ratio")}} of `3/4` has been set on them, to control their sizing as the list size changes, but keep their width constant as the height of the list is constant.
```

Author: updated

  - : Generated inside the children of a scroll container ancestor to represent their scroll markers. These can be selected to scroll the container to their associated child elements, and are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.
- {{cssxref(":target-current")}}
  - : This pseudo-class can be used to select the currently-active scroll marker. It can be used to provide a highlight style to the currently active marker, which is important for usability and accessibility.
- {{cssxref("::column")}}
  - : This pseudo-element represents the individual columns generated when a container is set to display its content in multiple columns via [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout). It can be used in conjunction with {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} to generate a scroll marker for each column.

## Carousel with single pages

Our first demo is a carousel of single pages, with each item taking up the full page. We have [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) as bottom navigation and [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) on the sides of the page, enabling the user to move to the next and previous pages.

> [Flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) is used for the general layout of the carousel, [CSS scroll snap](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) is used to enforce clear pagination, and [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning) is used to position the scroll markers and scroll buttons relative to the carousel.

Author: updated

### Carousel layout with flexbox

We use [flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) to create a single row of items; the `<ul>` is the flex container, and the `<li>` child list items are displayed horizontally with each item taking up the full width of the carousel.

The unordered list is made to fill the full width of the viewport with a width {{cssxref("width")}} of `100vw`; it is also given a {{cssxref("height")}} of `300px`, and some {{cssxref("padding")}}. We then use flexbox to lay out the list — setting a {{cssxref("display")}} value of `flex` to cause the child list items to display in a row (due to the default {{cssxref("flex-direction")}} value of `row`), with a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `4vw` between each one.

```css hidden live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

h1 {
  text-align: center;
  font-size: 1.7rem;
}
```

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step1 live-sample___first-example-step2
ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 20px;
  display: flex;
  gap: 4vw;
}
```

> Now its time to style the list items. The first declarations provide rudimentary styling. The important declaration is the {{cssxref("flex")}} value of `0 0 100%`, which forces each item to be as wide as the container (the `<ul>`). The viewport content will now scroll horizontally.

Author: I've updated the description to say that it is overflowing and the viewport currently scrolls. In the next section, I've updated the description to say that `overflow-x` is used to cause the content to scroll in the container instead.

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step2
ul::scroll-button(*) {
  border: 0;
  font-size: 2rem;
  background: none;
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.7);
  cursor: pointer;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):hover,
ul::scroll-button(*):focus {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 1);
}

ul::scroll-button(*):active {
  translate: 1px 1px;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):disabled {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.2);
  cursor: unset;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> We also set a {{cssxref("cursor")}} value of `pointer` on the scroll buttons to make it more obvious that they can be interacted with (an improvement for both general [UX](/en-US/docs/Glossary/UX) and [cognitive accessibility](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/Guides/Cognitive_accessibility)), unsetting it when the scroll buttons are `:disabled`.

Next, an appropriate icon is set on the left and right scroll buttons via the `content` property, which is also what causes the scroll buttons to be generated:

```css live-sample___first-example live-sample___first-example-step2
ul::scroll-button(left) {
  content: "◄";
}

ul::scroll-button(right) {
  content: "►";
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The scroll buttons are automatically given an appropriate accessible name, so they are announced appropriately by assistive technologies. For example, the above buttons are announced in VoiceOver as "scroll left, button" and "scroll right, button".

Author: Good call; I've used your update with some cleanup edits.

### Creating scroll markers

Scroll markers are a group of buttons, each one of which scrolls the carousel to a position related to one of the content pages. They provide an additional navigation tool that also indicates your progress through the carousel pages.

In this section, we will add scroll markers to the carousel, which involves three main features:

- The {{cssxref("scroll-marker-group")}} property is set on the scroll container element. It needs to be set to a non-`none` value for the {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element to be generated; its value specifies where the scroll marker group appears in the carousel's tab order and layout box order (but not DOM structure) — `before` puts it at the start, before the scroll buttons, while `after` puts it at the end.
- The {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element exists inside a scroll container, and is used to collect together and lay out scroll markers.

> - {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} pseudo-elements exist inside children of a scroll container ancestor, and represent their scroll markers. These are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.

Author: updated

To begin with, the list's `scroll-marker-group` property is set to `after`, so the `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is placed after the list's DOM content in the focus and layout box order; this means it comes after the scroll buttons:

```css live-sample___first-example
ul {
  scroll-marker-group: after;
}
```

> Next, the list's `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is positioned relative to the carousel using CSS anchor positioning, similar to the scroll buttons except that it is horizontally centered on the carousel using a {{cssxref("justify-self")}} value of `anchor-center`. The group is laid out using flexbox, with a {{cssxref("justify-content")}} value of of `center` and a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `20px` so that its children (the `::scroll-marker` pseudo-elements) are centered inside the `::scroll-marker-group` with a gap between each one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, the list's `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is positioned relative to the carousel using CSS anchor positioning, similar to the scroll button's, except that it is horizontally centered on the carousel using a {{cssxref("justify-self")}} value of `anchor-center`. The group is laid out using flexbox, with a {{cssxref("justify-content")}} value of of `center` and a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `20px` so that its children (the `::scroll-marker` pseudo-elements) are centered inside the `::scroll-marker-group` with a gap between each one.
```

```css live-sample___first-example
ul::scroll-marker-group {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
  top: calc(anchor(bottom) - 70px);
  justify-self: anchor-center;

>   display: flex;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

  display: flex;
```
to differentiate the positioning styles v. the layout ones

  justify-content: center;
  gap: 20px;
}
```

> Next, the scroll markers themselves are styled. The look of each one is handled by setting {{cssxref("width")}}, {{cssxref("height")}}, {{cssxref("background-color")}}, {{cssxref("border")}}, and {{cssxref("border-radius")}}, but we also need to set a non-`none` value for the `content` property so they are actually generated.

Reviewer 2: add something about how they can be styled like any generated content, adding a link to /en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_generated_content. possibly removing the props used and saying "rudimentary styles". 

Preference for last phrase is to make it a full sentence like...
```
The important thing to note is that we need to set a non-`none` value for the `content` property so they are actually generated.
```

Author: Good call; updated

  border-radius: 50%;
  content: "";
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Generated content is inline by default; we can apply `width` and `height` to our scroll markers because they are being laid out as flex items.

Finally for this section, the {{cssxref(":target-current")}} pseudo-class is used to select whichever scroll marker corresponds to the currently visible "page", highlighting how far the user has scrolled through the content. In this case, we set the `background-color` to `black` so it is styled as a filled-in circle.

```css live-sample___first-example
li::scroll-marker:target-current {
  background-color: black;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Accessibility-wise, the scroll marker group and contained scroll markers are rendered with [`tablist`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/tablist_role)/[`tab`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/tab_role) semantics. When you <kbd>Tab</kbd> to the group with the keyboard, it behaves like a single item (that is, another press of the <kbd>Tab</kbd> key will move past the group to the next item), and you can move between the different scroll markers using the left and right (or up and down) cursor keys.

> ## Single page carousel final result

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Single page carousel final result
```

Author: I don't want to do this; I like having the final result sections in the right-hand nav, so they are easy to find.

> All of the above code combines together to create the following final result:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All of the above code combines together to create the following result:
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("first-example", "100%", "400px")}}

Since the previous live example, the scroll markers have been added — try pressing them to jump straight to each page. Note how the current marker is highlighted so you can see where you are in the pagination. Also try tabbing to the scroll marker group, then use the cursor keys to cycle through each page.

You can also navigate between pages by swiping left and right, dragging the scroll bar, or pressing the scroll buttons.

## Responsive carousel: multiple items per page

> The second demo is a carousel with multiple items per page, which again includes [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) and [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) for navigating through the pages. The demo is also responsive — different numbers of items appear on each page depending on the viewport width.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second demo is a carousel with multiple items per page, which again includes [scroll buttons](#creating_scroll_buttons) and [scroll markers](#creating_scroll_markers) for navigating through the pages. This demo is also responsive — different numbers of items appear on each page depending on the viewport width.
```

This demo is very similar to the [Carousel with single pages](#carousel_with_single_pages) demo, except that instead of using flexbox for layout, it uses [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout) and the {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-element to create arbitary columns that span the full width of the carousel and may contain multiple items.

> Using this approach, we can be sure that if the viewport grows or shrinks, while the item size remains constant, we'll never have a partial item displayed off the edge of the scrollport. In this case, the scroll markers are created per-column rather than per-item.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using this approach, we can be sure that if the viewport grows or shrinks, while the item size remains constant, we'll never have a partial item displayed off the edge of the scrollport. In this case, the scroll markers are created on scroll container fragments, per-column, rather than on children, per-item.
```

    <h2>Item 6</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 7</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 8</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 9</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 10</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 11</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 12</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 13</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 14</h2>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Item 15</h2>
  </li>
</ul>
```

### Carousel layout using columns

This example uses [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout), rather than flexbox, to layout the carousel items. The {{cssxref("columns")}} value of `1` forces each column to be the full width of the container, with the contents displaying a single column at a time. A {{cssxref("text-align")}} value of `center` is also applied, forcing the contents to align with the center of the list.

```css hidden live-sample___second-example
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

h1 {
  text-align: center;
  font-size: 1.7rem;
}
```

```css live-sample___second-example
ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 10px;

  overflow-x: scroll;
  scroll-snap-type: x mandatory;

  columns: 1;
  text-align: center;
}
```

> We provide rudimentary box styling for the list items, then apply layout styles to cause multiple items to fit into the single content column if the container is wider than it is tall. The number dynamically changes as the list gets wider or narrower.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We provide rudimentary box styling for the list items, then apply layout styles to allow one or multiple items to fit into the single content column, depending on the viewport width. The number dynamically changes as the list gets wider or narrower.
```

Author: updated

```css live-sample___second-example
li {
  list-style-type: none;

  display: inline-block;
  height: 100%;

>   aspect-ratio: 3/4;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  width: 200px;
```

  background-color: #eee;
  border: 1px solid #ddd;
  padding: 20px;
  margin: 0 10px;

  text-align: left;
}

li:nth-child(even) {
  background-color: cyan;
}
```

The key layout properties are as follows:

- A {{cssxref("display")}} value of `inline-block` has been set to force the list items to sit alongside one another and make the list scroll horizontally.

> - A fixed {{cssxref("aspect-ratio")}} of `3/4` has been set on them to control their sizing as the list size changes, keeping their width constant as the height of the list is constant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An absolute {{cssxref("width")}} of `200px` has been set on them to control their sizing, meaning one or more will fit in a column that grows and shrinks along with the width of the viewport.
```

```css live-sample___second-example
ul::column {
  scroll-snap-align: center;
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___second-example
ul::scroll-button(*) {
  border: 0;
  font-size: 2rem;
  background: none;
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.7);
  cursor: pointer;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):hover,
ul::scroll-button(*):focus {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 1);
}

ul::scroll-button(*):active {
  translate: 1px 1px;
}

ul::scroll-button(*):disabled {
  color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.2);
  cursor: unset;
}

ul::scroll-button(left) {
  content: "◄";
}

ul::scroll-button(right) {
  content: "►";
}

ul {
  anchor-name: --myCarousel;
}

ul::scroll-button(*) {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
}

ul::scroll-button(left) {
  right: calc(anchor(left) - 70px);
  bottom: calc(anchor(top) + 13px);
}

ul::scroll-button(right) {
  left: calc(anchor(right) - 70px);
  bottom: calc(anchor(top) + 13px);
}

ul {
  scroll-marker-group: after;
}

ul::scroll-marker-group {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
  top: calc(anchor(bottom) - 70px);
  justify-self: anchor-center;
  display: flex;
  justify-content: center;
  gap: 20px;
}
```

### Column scroll markers

> The CSS for creating the scroll markers in this demo is nearly identical to the [previous demo](#creating_scroll_markers), except that the selectors are different — the scroll markers are created on the generated `::column` scroll markers rather than the list items (note how we are nesting two pseudo-elements here, to generate scroll markers on the generated columns).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CSS for creating the scroll markers in this demo is nearly identical to the [previous demo](#creating_scroll_markers), except that the selectors are different — the scroll markers are created on the generated `::column` scroll markers rather than the list items (note how we are including two pseudo-elements here, to generate scroll markers on the generated columns).
```

```css live-sample___second-example
ul::column::scroll-marker {
  content: "";
  width: 16px;
  height: 16px;
  background-color: transparent;
  border: 2px solid black;
  border-radius: 10px;
}

ul::column::scroll-marker:target-current {
  background-color: black;
}
```

> ## Responsive carousel final result

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Responsive carousel final result
```

Author: see earlier comment about this.

The Responsive carousel is rendered as follows:

{{EmbedLiveSample("second-example", "100%", "400px")}}

> Try navigating between the different pages by swiping left and right, using the scroll bar, pressing the scroll buttons, and pressing the scroll markers. The functionality is similar to the single page flexbox example, except that now there are multiple list items in each navigated position; the scroll markers are on columns potentially containing multiple items, instead of on each item.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try navigating between the different pages by swiping left and right, using the scroll bar, pressing the scroll buttons, and pressing the scroll markers. The functionality is similar to the single page flexbox example, except that now there are multiple list items in each navigated position; the scroll markers are set on column fragments, potentially containing multiple items, instead of on each item.
```

---
title: Creating CSS carousels
slug: Web/CSS/CSS_overflow/CSS_carousels
page-type: guide
---

{{CSSRef}}

> The [CSS overflow](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_overflow) module defines features enabling the creation of pure-CSS carousel UI features that are flexible and accessible; this includes scroll buttons, scroll markers, and generated columns. This guide explains how to use these features.

Author: I like some of this, but other parts are somewhat inaccurate (it can be done without multi-col, and it involves only some of the features defined inside CSS overflow). I played around with it a bit and ended up with the following amalgamated version:

> The [CSS overflow](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_overflow) module defines features enabling the creation of flexible and accessible pure-CSS carousels with browser-generated and developer-styled scroll buttons and scroll markers. This guide explains how to use these features.

Thank you, marketing department ;-)

## Carousel concepts

> **Carousels** are a common feature on the web — they typically take the form of a scrolling content area at the start of a web page containing several articles such as ads, headline news stories, or key product features. Users can move through the articles by swiping, pressing **scroll buttons** (for example, "prev" and "next"), or activating a series of links representing each article (known as **scroll markers**).

Reviewer 2: Let's go with "item", rather than slide or article. It really can be anything... really cool features!

> **Carousels** are a common feature on the web — they typically take the form of a scrolling content area at the start of a web page containing several articles such as ads, headline news stories, or key product features. Users can move through the articles by swiping, pressing **scroll buttons** (for example, "prev" and "next"), or activating a series of links representing each article (known as **scroll markers**).

Author: Some nice suggestions here. It is totally legitimate to use "article" in the generic sense — one item in a group of things — but you are right, people might confuse them with `<article>` elements. So, I've gone with items instead. I've updated this in all relevant places. For this particular edit, I ended up with:

> **Carousels** are a common feature on the web. They typically take the form of a scrolling content area containing several items, such as presentation slides, ads, headline news stories, or key product features.

Users can move through the items by clicking or activating navigational buttons or by swiping. The navigation usually includes **scroll buttons**, generally "previous" and "next" buttons or links, and **scroll markers**, which are a series of button or link icons each representing an item within the carousel.

![A carousel with a content area in the middle, previous and next buttons to the left and right, and scroll markers at the bottom](carousel.png)

> A key feature of carousels is **pagination** — the articles feel like separate items that are moved between rather than forming one continuous section of content. You might show one article at a time, or several articles on each "page".

Author: Good call. I've added the following sentence to the end of the paragraph:

> When several items are shown, you might choose to show an entire new page of items each time the "next" button is pressed, or add a single new item on the end of the list and move the first one out of view.

## CSS carousel features

The CSS carousel features enable creating carousels using only CSS and HTML, with the browser handling most of the scrolling and link references in an accessible, flexible, consistent manner. These features are as follows:

- {{cssxref("::scroll-button()")}} pseudo-elements exist inside a {{glossary("scroll container")}} and represent scroll buttons, which will be wired up to scroll the container in the specified direction.
- The {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element exists inside a scroll container, and is used to collect together and lay out scroll markers.
- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} pseudo-elements exist inside the children of a scroll container ancestor, and represent their scroll markers. These can be selected to scroll the container to their associated child elements, and are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.
- The {{cssxref(":target-current")}} pseudo-class can be used to select the currently-active scroll marker, to give it a highlight style.

> - The {{cssxref("::column")}} pseudo-element represents the different column fragments of a container set to display in multiple columns via [CSS multi-column layout](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_multicol_layout). This can be used to, for example, generate scroll markers for each column, regardless of what content has been placed inside them.

Author: updated

> The examples below also use other features, including:

Author: OK, removed. I've made sure the appropriate links are included later on in the article.

- [CSS scroll snap](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_scroll_snap) to snap to each article or "page".
- The {{cssxref("columns")}} property, as a mechanism to split content up into arbitrary columns.
- The {{cssxref("interactivity")}} property, to render elements {{glossary("inert")}} when they are not being shown inside the carousel.
- [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning) to position the scroll buttons and scroll marker group relative to the carousel.
- [Flexbox](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_flexible_box_layout) for additional layout/spacing.

Two demos are presented below:

- In the first one, each article of content takes up a full page of the carousel, and you can scroll between articles using the scroll buttons, etc. Flexbox is used in this case to force each article to take up the full width of the carousel.
- The second demo uses the `columns` property and the `::columns` pseudo-element to create arbitary columns that span the full width of the carousel, and contain multiple articles that can vary in number depending on the viewport width. In this case, the scroll markers are created per-column rather than per-article.

> ## Example markup

Author: done

The HTML for the first demo consists of a [heading element](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/Heading_Elements) and an [unordered list](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ul), with each [list item](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/li) containing some sample content that includes interactive elements ([links](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/a) and [buttons](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button)):

```html live-sample___first-example
<h1>CSS carousel demo 1</h1>
<ul>

>   <li>

Author: We don't need the interactive elements in the demos anymore because we are no longer trying to demonstrate using the `interactivity` property and view transitions to render them inert when offscreen. We can demonstrate that on the `interactivity` page if/when it finally surfaces.

So, I've removed all the list item content except for the `<h2>`s, and added zebra striping to them.

    <h2>Page 1</h2>
    <p>This is the first page of content.</p>
    <p><a href="#">A demo link</a>.</p>
    <p><button>Press me</button></p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 2</h2>
    <p>This is the second page of content.</p>
    <p><a href="#">A demo link</a>.</p>
    <p><button>Press me</button></p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 3</h2>
    <p>This is the third page of content.</p>
    <p><a href="#">A demo link</a>.</p>
    <p><button>Press me</button></p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <h2>Page 4</h2>
    <p>This is the fourth page of content.</p>
    <p><a href="#">A demo link</a>.</p>
    <p><button>Press me</button></p>
  </li>
</ul>
```

> The HTML for the second demo is very similar, except that there are significantly more list items, and each one contains less content:

Author: done

```html-nolint
...
  <li>
    <h2>Item 1</h2>
      <p><a href="#">A demo link</a>.</p>
  </li>
...

> ```

Author: Yeah, I've done this before in a different PR; this new live sample functionality is really useful.

I will update the sections for the first demo to do this.

## First example layout with flexbox

> In the first example, the unordered list is given a {{cssxref("width")}} of `100vw` to force it to the full width of the viewport, a {{cssxref("height")}} of `300px`, and `20px` of {{cssxref("padding")}}. We then give it a {{cssxref("display")}} value of `flex` to force the child list items to display horizontally, and a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `4vw` between each one.

Author: I've used some of your suggestions here:

> The unordered list is made to fill the full width of the viewport with a width {{cssxref("width")}} of `100vw`; it is also given a {{cssxref("height")}} of `300px`, and some {{cssxref("padding")}}. We then use flexbox to lay out the list — setting a {{cssxref("display")}} value of `flex` to force the child list items to display horizontally, with a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `4vw` between each one. As the viewport is wider than our horizontal row of flex-items, the `<ul>` will be a {{glossary("scroll container")}}.

However, I'm not showing the demo here, as it won't look like it's working at this point. Plus, it is not the job of this tutorial to teach flexbox. I'm showing the demo after the list items have been styled, and the layout is complete.

```css hidden live-sample___first-example
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

h1 {
  text-align: center;
}

button {
  background-color: white;
}
```

```css live-sample___first-example
ul {
  width: 100vw;
  height: 300px;
  padding: 20px;
  display: flex;
  gap: 4vw;
  overflow-x: scroll;
  scroll-snap-type: x mandatory;
}
```

Now onto the list items — they are first given some rudimentary styling, followed by a {{cssxref("flex")}} value of `0 0 calc(100vw - 40px)` to force each one to be as wide as their container (the `<ul>`), minus the padding set on its inline ends. This causes the list items to be horizontally centered inside their container when visible. Next, a {{cssxref("scroll-snap-align")}} value of `center` is set so that, when the list is scrolled, it snaps to the center of each list item.

```css live-sample___first-example
li {
  list-style-type: none;
  background-color: #eee;
  border: 1px solid #ddd;

>   padding: 20px;

Author: OK, basic styling all moved into the flexbox section, and new scroll snap section added, which just deals with the scroll snap stuff.

I did a bunch of testing, and the scroll snapping is needed really — the carousel features work without it, but the result is crap - the content doesn't scroll to each page cleanly, and the pagination effect us lost. I added a note about this later on.

>   flex: 0 0 calc(100vw - 40px);

Author: Hrm, that's weird! I messed about for ages to try to get this to behave, with the `<li>` centered inside the gap in the `<ul>`, with the padding respected too. But you are right; 100% works. I think it might be because originally I wasn't setting `box-sizing: border-box` on the layout, but then I added it in..?

Anyway, updated. It is much nicer to not have to explain that.

  scroll-snap-align: center;
}
```

> ## Setting inertness on non-visible articles

Author: Removed.

```css live-sample___first-example
li {
  view-timeline: --inertChange inline;
  animation-timeline: --inertChange;
  animation-name: inert-change;
  animation-fill-mode: both;
}
```

Next, the animation {{cssxref("@keyframes")}} are defined. An {{cssxref("interactivity")}} value of `inert` is set at positions `entry 0%` and `exit 100%` of the view timeline. Combined with the `animation-fill-mode: both` value, this means that the list items will be inert before the start and after the end of the view timeline, that is, when they are outside the scroll container. Between positions `entry 1%` and `exit 99%`, `interactivity: auto` is set on the list items, meaning they can be interacted with normally when they are inside the scroll container.

```css live-sample___first-example
@keyframes inert-change {
  entry 0%,
  exit 100% {
    interactivity: inert;
  }

  entry 1%,
  exit 99% {
    interactivity: auto;
  }
}
```

## Creating the scroll buttons

> 

Author: I've added some text at the top of the sections to explain what we are doing in each section. But I think that with the previous section reworking (flexbox and scroll snap sections), the ordering works pretty nicely now.

- The {{cssxref("scroll-marker-group")}} property is set on the scroll container element. It needs to be set to a non-`none` value for the {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element to be generated; its value specifies where the scroll marker group appears in the carousel's tab order and layout box order (but not DOM structure) — `before` puts it at the start, before the scroll buttons, while `after` puts it at the end.
- The {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} pseudo-element exists inside a scroll container, and is used to collect together and lay out scroll markers.

> - {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} pseudo-elements exist inside children and {{cssxref("::column")}} fragments of a scroll container ancestor, and represent their scroll markers. These are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- {{cssxref("::scroll-marker")}} pseudo-elements exist inside the children and {{cssxref("::column")}} fragments of a scroll container ancestor, and represent their scroll markers. These are collected inside the ancestor's {{cssxref("::scroll-marker-group")}} for layout purposes.
```

}
```

Next, the list's `::scroll-marker-group` pseudo-element is positioned relative to the carousel using CSS anchor positioning, similar to the scroll button's, except that it is horizontally centered on the carousel using a {{cssxref("justify-self")}} value of `anchor-center`. The group is laid out using flexbox, with a {{cssxref("justify-content")}} value of of `center` and a {{cssxref("gap")}} of `20px` so that its children (the `::scroll-marker` pseudo-elements) are centered inside the `::scroll-marker-group` with a gap between each one.

```css live-sample___first-example
ul::scroll-marker-group {
  position: absolute;
  position-anchor: --myCarousel;
  top: calc(anchor(bottom) - 70px);
  justify-self: anchor-center;

  display: flex;
  justify-content: center;
  gap: 20px;
}
```

> Next, we handle the look and feel of the scroll markers themselves; they can be styled just like any other [generated content](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_generated_content). It is important to note that we need to set a non-`none` value for the `content` property so the scroll markers are actually generated. We also set some rudimentary styles to make the markers appear as outline circles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we handle the look and feel of the scroll markers themselves; they can be styled just like any other [generated content](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_generated_content). It is important to note that we need to set a non-`none` value for the `content` property so the scroll markers are actually generated. We also set some rudimentary styles to make the markers appear as outlined circles:
```

Author: done
